fix: wpb-22590 add pages for ansible operations in production and intro (#106)
wireapp/wire-docs: src/how-to/install/ansible-VMs.md

# Installing kubernetes and databases on VMs with ansible

## Introduction

In a production environment, some parts of the wire-server infrastructure (such as e.g. Cassandra, PostgresSQL, RabbitMQ, Minio etc databases) are best configured outside kubernetes. Additionally, kubernetes can be rapidly set up with kubespray, via ansible. This section covers installing k8s services and databases with ansible.

Please ensure that we have created VMs as per the [production architecture](planning.md#production-installation-persistent-data-high-availability), we would be using this information in the next step of creating inventory.

![Wire Server Architecture HA](img/architecture-prod-ha.png)

## Downloading and extracting the artifact

Create a fresh workspace to download the artifacts:

```bash
$ cd ...  # you pick a good location!
```

> Obtain the latest airgap artifact for wire-server-deploy. Please contact us to get it.

Reviewer: how does 'contact us' work?

Extract the above listed artifacts into your workspace:

```bash
$ wget https://s3-eu-west-1.amazonaws.com/public.wire.com/artifacts/wire-server-deploy-static-<HASH>.tgz
$ tar xvzf wire-server-deploy-static-<HASH>.tgz
```

> Where `<HASH>` above is the hash of your deployment artifact, given to you by Wire, or acquired by looking at the above build job.

Reviewer: what build job?

Extract this tarball.

Make sure that the admin host can `ssh` into all the machines that you want to provision. Our [docker container](dependencies.md#making-tooling-available-in-your-environment) will use the `.ssh` folder and the `ssh-agent` of the user running the scripts.

There's also a docker image containing the tooling inside this repo.

## Editing the inventory

Copy [ansible/inventory/offline/99-static](https://github.com/wireapp/wire-server-deploy/blob/master/ansible/inventory/offline/99-static)  to `ansible/inventory/offline/hosts.ini`, and backup the original.

```bash
cp ansible/inventory/offline/99-static ansible/inventory/offline/hosts.ini

> mv ansible/inventory/offline/99-static ansible/inventory/offline/orig.99-static

Reviewer: the move doesn't do anything productive.

```

Edit `ansible/inventory/offline/hosts.ini`. Here, you will describe the topology of your offline deploy as explained in the next section.

Add one entry in the `all` section of this file for each machine you are managing via ansible. This will be all of the machines in your Wire cluster.

If you are using username/password to log into and sudo up, in the `all:vars` section, add:
```ini
ansible_user=<USERNAME>
ansible_password=<PASSWORD>
ansible_become_pass=<PASSWORD>
```

> > Note: Make sure that `assethost` is present in the inventory file with the correct `ansible_host` (and `ip` values if required)

Reviewer: shouldn't this note hold for all entries in this file?

### Updating Database Group Memberships
It's recommended to update the lists of what nodes belong to which group, so ansible knows what to install on these nodes.

> These sections can be divided into individual host groups, reflecting the architecture of the target infrastructure. Examples with individual nodes for Elastic, MinIO, PostgreSQL, RabbitMQ and Cassandra are commented out below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These sections are divided into individual host groups, reflecting the architecture of the target infrastructure. Examples with individual nodes for Elastic, MinIO, PostgreSQL, RabbitMQ and Cassandra are commented out below.
```

> These sections can be divided into individual host groups, reflecting the architecture of the target infrastructure. Examples with individual nodes for Elastic, MinIO, PostgreSQL, RabbitMQ and Cassandra are commented out below.

Reviewer: what is the point of [providing these examples? there's one in their hands, on disk already!

```
kubenode1 ansible_host=192.168.122.21 ip=192.168.0.2
```
Repeat this for all of the instances.

### Setting up Database network interfaces and service specific variables:
- Make sure that `cassandra_network_interface` is set to the name of the network interface on which the kubenodes should talk to cassandra and on which the cassandra nodes should communicate among each other. Run `ip addr` on one of the cassandra nodes to determine the network interface names, and which networks they correspond to. In Ubuntu 22.04 for example, interface names are predictable and individualized, eg. `enp41s0`.
- Similarly `elasticsearch_network_interface`, `rabbitmq_network_interface`, `postgresql_network_interface` and `minio_network_interface` should be set to the network interface names to the service specific groups to ensure communicatation with kubernetes and among each other.

> - RabbitMQ requires the variable `rabbitmq_cluster_master` to configure one of the `rmq-cluster` nodes as master.

Reviewer: what about the variable? what should it be set to?

> - PostgreSQL requires following variables to define the database topology and database to create:

Reviewer: if postgres requires.. is this in the file they are editing, or not?

```ini
wire_dbname= wire-server
repmgr_node_config = {"postgresql1": {"node_id": 1, "priority": 150, "role": "primary"}, "postgresql2": {"node_id": 2, "priority": 100, "role": "standby"}, "postgresql3": {"node_id": 3, "priority": 50, "role": "standby"}}
```
- In an INI inventory, the `repmgr_node_config` keys must match the PostgreSQL inventory hostnames.

> - To read more about specific PostgreSQL configuration, reat at [PostgreSQL High Availability Cluster - Quick Setup](../administrate/postgresql-cluster.md).

Reviewer: Why is this here? we do not do this for the other backing services.

### Example hosts.ini

Here is an example hosts.ini file for the primary k8s cluster and database services.

```ini
[all:vars]
ansible_user=<USERNAME>
ansible_password=<PASSWORD>
ansible_become_pass=<PASSWORD>

[assethost]
assethost ansible_host=10.1.1.1

[cassandra]
cassandra1 ansible_host=10.1.1.17
cassandra2 ansible_host=10.1.1.2
cassandra3 ansible_host=10.1.1.16

[cassandra:vars]
cassandra_network_interface=enp7s0

[cassandra_seed]
cassandra3

[elasticsearch]
elasticsearch1 ansible_host=10.1.1.9
elasticsearch2 ansible_host=10.1.1.15
elasticsearch3 ansible_host=10.1.1.19

[elasticsearch:vars]
elasticsearch_network_interface=enp7s0

[elasticsearch_master:children]
elasticsearch

[kube-node]
kubenode1 ansible_host=10.1.1.3 etcd_member_name=kubenode1 ip=10.1.1.3
kubenode2 ansible_host=10.1.1.4 etcd_member_name=kubenode2 ip=10.1.1.4
kubenode3 ansible_host=10.1.1.8 etcd_member_name=kubenode3 ip=10.1.1.8

[kube-master:children]
kube-node

[etcd:children]
kube-master

[k8s-cluster:children]
kube-master
kube-node

[k8s-cluster:vars]
calico_mtu=1450
calico_veth_mtu=1430

[minio]
minio1 ansible_host=10.1.1.6
minio2 ansible_host=10.1.1.7

> minio2 ansible_host=10.1.1.20

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
minio3 ansible_host=10.1.1.20
```

[minio:vars]
minio_network_interface=enp7s0

[postgresql]
postgresql1 ansible_host=10.1.1.11
postgresql2 ansible_host=10.1.1.5
postgresql3 ansible_host=10.1.1.12

[postgresql:vars]
postgresql_network_interface=enp7s0
wire_dbname=wire-server

> repmgr_node_config={"postgresql1":{"node_id":1,"priority":150,"role":"primary"},"postgresql2":{"node_id":2,"priority":100,"role":"standby"},"postgresql3":{"node_id":3,"priority":50,"role":"standby"}}

Reviewer 2: Can use some serialization for better readability

Author: ini inventory doesn't support [multiline value](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/INI_file#Format). We can pick yaml format for it but indentation can become tricky for end user.  Will create an internal ticket to convert the default inventory format to yaml.

[postgresql_ro]
postgresql2
postgresql3

[postgresql_rw]
postgresql1

[rmq-cluster]
rabbitmq1 ansible_host=10.1.1.18
rabbitmq2 ansible_host=10.1.1.13
rabbitmq3 ansible_host=10.1.1.14

[rmq-cluster:vars]
rabbitmq_cluster_master=rabbitmq3
rabbitmq_network_interface=enp7s0
```

> ## Generating random secrets for the services

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Generating secrets for the services
```

Minio and coturn services have shared secrets with the `wire-server` helm chart. Run the folllowing script that generates a fresh set of secrets for these components:

```bash
./bin/offline-secrets.sh
```

This should generate 3 secret files as:
- `./ansible/inventory/group_vars/all/secrets.yaml` - This file will be used by ansible playbooks to configure service secrets.
- `values/wire-server/secrets.yaml` - This contains the secrets for Wire services and share some secrets from coturn and database services.
- `values/coturn/secrets.yaml` - This contains a secret for the coturn service.

> 

Reviewer 2: Both for wire-server and coturn, the secrets are created as [prod-secrets.example.yaml](https://github.com/wireapp/wire-server-deploy/blob/master/bin/offline-secrets.sh#L39) last time i checked

The order matters: offline package sources and container runtime must be ready before image seeding, time sync should happen before the cluster stabilizes, Kubernetes must exist before the rest of the platform is wired around it, and `helm_external.yml` comes last because it depends on the database and messaging nodes already being deployed.

If one step fails and you want to run the playbooks manually, use the `d` alias shown above and execute the specific command directly in the same order.

### Ensuring Kubernetes is healthy.

Ensure the k8s cluster comes up healthy. The container also contains `kubectl`, so check the node status:

```bash
d kubectl get nodes -owide
```
They should all report ready.

### Troubleshooting external services
Cassandra, Minio, PostgresSQL, RabbitMQ and Elasticsearch are running outside Kubernets cluster, make sure those machines have necessary ports open -

> On each of the machines running Cassandra, Minio, PostgresSQL, RabbitMQ and Elasticsearch, run the following commands to open the necessary ports, if needed:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On each of the machines running Cassandra, Minio, PostgresSQL, RabbitMQ and Elasticsearch, run the following commands to open the necessary ports, if necessary:
```

> ```bash

Reviewer 2: May be we can consider to automate this via ansible

Author: Yes, we can automate it but by default we have noticed that VM firewalls are open. Here we are trying to say that these ports should open. let me rephrase it better.

sudo bash -c '
set -eo pipefail;

# cassandra
ufw allow 9042/tcp;
ufw allow 9160/tcp;
ufw allow 7000/tcp;
ufw allow 7199/tcp;

# elasticsearch
ufw allow 9300/tcp;
ufw allow 9200/tcp;

# minio
ufw allow 9000/tcp;
ufw allow 9092/tcp;

#rabbitmq
ufw allow 5671/tcp;
ufw allow 5672/tcp;
ufw allow 4369/tcp;
ufw allow 25672/tcp;

#postgresql
ufw allow 5432/tcp;
'
```

## Deploying secondary k8s cluster for calling services

Now we are done with configuring primary k8s cluster and databases. Now, we would be installing a secondary k8s cluster.

![Calling Architecture HA](img/architecture-calling-ha.png)

### Marking kubenodes for calling servers (SFT/Coturn)

> The SFT & Coturn Calling server should be running on a kubernetes nodes that are connected to the public internet. If not all kubernetes nodes match these criteria, you should specifically label the nodes that do match these criteria, so that you're sure SFT is deployed correctly.

Reviewer: This is not true.

By using a `node_label` you can make sure SFT & Coturn are only deployed on certain nodes like `call_kubenode1` & `call_kubenode2`:

```ini
[all:vars]
ansible_user=<USERNAME>
ansible_password=<PASSWORD>
ansible_become_pass=<PASSWORD>

[assethost]
assethost ansible_host=10.1.1.1

[kube-node]
call_kubenode1  ansible_host=10.1.1.33 etcd_member_name=call_kubenode1 ip=10.1.1.33 node_labels="{'wire.com/role': 'sftd'}" node_annotations="{'wire.com/external-ip': 'a.b.c.d'}"

> call_kubenode2 ansible_host=10.1.1.34 etcd_member_name=call_kubenode2 ip=10.1.1.34 node_labels="{'wire.com/role': 'coturn'}""

Reviewer 2: The quotation seems off

Reviewer 2: Is this config for a different calling cluster? If so, please mention it. The template we provide does not have this reference.

Author: Yes, this is a new sample inventory, I am trying to add to provide for calling k8s cluster.

call_kubenode3 ansible_host=10.1.1.36 etcd_member_name=call_kubenode3 ip=10.1.1.36

[kube-master:children]
kube-node

[etcd:children]
kube-master

[k8s-cluster:children]
kube-master
kube-node

[k8s-cluster:vars]
calico_mtu=1450
calico_veth_mtu=1430

> ```

Reviewer 2: Why the user needs to set `mtu` based on Hetzner's requirement here? I would recommend to read up the doc: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubespray/blob/master/docs/CNI/calico.md#configuring-interface-mtu before suggesting something really advanced. If there is an use case to set those configs, its upto the user

Author: yes, these were carried on from our cd template. Taking them out.

> If the node does not know its onw public IP (e.g. becuase it's behind NAT) then you should also set the `wire.com/external-ip` annotation to the public IP of the node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the node is not bound to the public IP the users will see(e.g. becuase it's behind NAT) then you should also set the `wire.com/external-ip` annotation to the public IP of the node.
```
